How is my trip out here?
As usual, hectic and hastily planned.
We always seem to, even though we have the best intentions of getting everything together
well in advance and very organized and business-like, we tend not to.
But if I ask a dumb question or something like that, just say,
wait a minute, you know, back up, we chop all that stuff out.
Yeah, it's no problem.
Or if I make a dumb answer.
We chop that out too.
Okay.
Let's start off with the basic one.
When did you get interested or when did you get interested in art development?
I think I developed when I was born.
My father's always worked in the space industry, or in the missiles and space industry.
So I had that input around me.
He had always been reading science fiction since I was young.
So I had the magazines around to look at.
And some of my earliest recollections are of looking at the covers of old amazing stories, magazines, or paperback books.
And in fact, some of them influenced me to a great deal.
Before I could even read or write, I remember looking at some of those covers for hours
and absorbing the visual feeling of the paintings.
There were a few that were especially captivating for me.
And I remembered them to this day exactly what the paintings look like.
And I could describe to you the compositions and some of the colors of the paintings.
And it's a funny thing at the last World Science Fiction Convention, I was walking down
by one of the dealer's tables in the dealer's room.
And I just started going through some of the paperback books.
And I saw one of the covers that I remembered from when I was three years old or whatever.
It was interesting to me because I hadn't been able, in retrospect, to pinpoint the exact time
when I started really being fascinated by science fiction imagery.
And this book had been published in 1952 or 53.
So being born in 1950, that pretty much establishes the beginning of that at around three years old or so.
But the fact that it meant so much to me that I remembered that exact cover until my present age
says something about how I guess it was just a part of me that that kind of imagery was important to me.
But later when I began to read, I became an avid reader of all types of literature,
but especially science fiction and fantasy.
And I had an interest in arts, so the two combined.
And it seemed natural to me to read and try to draw what I read.
And I would come home sometimes from science fiction movies or movies that I enjoyed
and tried to illustrate scenes that I'd seen in the movie from memory.
And that carried on pretty much into right into my college years.
I can continue beyond that point.
Because in college I had been laboring under the assumption that I had to have a real type of profession.
This is largely due to input from my parents, but I felt that I had to be something professional, like a lawyer,
something respectable, which being an artist isn't.
So I was diverted during my college years into wanting to become a doctor,
which is still a major interest in mine and had me a physiology.
And the sciences in general were always important to me.
But about three quarters of the way through my college education,
I decided to abandon my pre-med training and go full scale.
Well, actually it wasn't until my last year of college that I decided full tilt to go into illustrating or painting.
And I graduated with a degree in painting.
If I had taken one more course I would have had a degree in biology with an emphasis on anatomy and physiology, human anatomy and physiology.
To go a little bit on that, does that background or how does that background help you when you're painting?
Well, it helps me a lot in several ways.
First of all in constructing alien forms by just extrapolating upon comparative biology.
I can develop a life form that's both interesting visually and somewhat convincingly suited for a particular environment on another planet.
There's that and also it helps me in constructing a human form because I did a lot of dissection
and I know my human anatomy fairly well.
Whereas I know a lot of artists who don't, they know surface anatomy,
but they can't really construct a person well out of their imagination without at least the extensive use of photographs.
And that's something I try to avoid.
I think it shows in an artist's painting when one uses a photograph to develop the person
and then tries to create the rest of the painting out of one's imagination.
You see a real dichotomy between the way the person is painted and the rest of the painting is painted.
If it all comes out of your mind and it all looks like one product or whatever.
But one of the jobs I had when I was putting myself through colleges working in the anatomy and physiology labs
at the university I went to preparing the cadavers for the classes.
And during that time I managed to get some work in doing medical illustrations.
All this combined to really give me a good fundamental education in the way the body is made up.
You had some further training going on in art.
Yes, after college I went to, I wasn't, the teachers told me I was ready for a professional career,
but I didn't know what I wanted to do yet.
I mean I still didn't, well I knew what I wanted to do, but I didn't have the confidence to throw everything I had into a career in illustration.
I didn't know really where to start.
So to get a kind of professional polish I enrolled in the Art Center College of Design and LA.
That's now in Pasadena.
They moved after I left, but I only went there for nine months because I felt that they didn't have much to teach me after I was in there.
And a couple of my teachers advised me just to drop out and go ahead and start working.
So I sent some samples of my work to publishers in New York and a couple of them bit.
So I threw everything I had into the back of my Volkswagen and drove out from California to the East Coast to find my fortune.
That's where?
Don Wilheim?
Yes, Don Wilheim of Dollbooks was very interested in my work and quite supportive really in my early years.
Just a bit of a story.
What was, you got your first like cover job, how did that happen?
What happened there?
Well there was a couple of ways that it happened.
Excuse me.
I had a portfolio of items.
I came out to the East Coast and sat down and for two weeks just painted straight through.
I came out with seven pieces at the end of that time.
Excuse me.
Well that made me cut out all my coffin.
Anyway I had a portfolio of pieces and I went around first to Marvel Comics.
I'm starting low, at least in my opinion at this point.
I showed it to Roy Thomas who was the editor in chief at that time and he bought three pieces out of the portfolio.
So my first cover assignments weren't really commissioned from me.
They were bought from me because they were already done.
Now it's true that after you bought those you required extensive changes in the work.
Something that still bothers me to this day.
Anyway that's how that happened.
Now with Don Wilheim he saw slides of my work of course from California.
Later I went in to see him when I came out to the East Coast and he gave me a manuscript for a book.
I took it home and did some sketches for the manuscript based upon ideas that I thought would make good cover ideas.
He selected one and gave me the go ahead and that became the painting.
That's pretty much how I work on every book cover.
You're reading a manuscript now?
Several.
Yeah.
Why don't you go through how that process works for you?
Pick a specific.
Boy that's hard.
Every book is so different.
What about that one?
Oh the White Dragon, yeah.
That's going back away.
That's back in 77 or 78 when I did that.
I read the book one time just as a reader so to speak.
Then I go through it again the second time as an illustrator making notes and margins about details of way people and objects and things look.
Making sure that I try to catch all the details.
So I don't make someone who's blonde, black-haired or whatever.
I like to be really true to the story as much as possible.
Especially if I'm taking a narrative approach to doing an illustration.
After going through it that second time I'll sit down and start to develop thumbnail sketches which are just small drawings on scrap paper actually.
And try to formulate an idea of what I would like to illustrate from that book.
There's usually something in any book no matter how bad or good that will make a good painting.
It's a matter of digging through it and finding what interests you and what motivates you to do a really good job.
So I go through it and try to collate all my different ideas and put it together into a painting.
That is a mysterious part that I can't really describe to you how that happens.
I guess that's what makes me what I am.
That process there of distilling what I've read into something that's a visual image that captures what's in the book.
That process takes a few days to do.
Sometimes I get an instant image.
The cover I just did for Robert A. Highline's book Friday.
I had an instantaneous concept of what that cover was going to look like.
As soon as I finished reading the book the first time I had a perfectly clear idea of what Friday looked like.
I knew that the cover to this book had to be a portrait of this character because the character had such personality.
Really the book was written around her personality I think.
So that was my approach there.
With other books like The White Dragon it involved a much more laborious process.
There were so many good scenes to choose from.
It's hard to figure out which one would be the best one for the book and which one is my favorite.
That takes a little bit more time.
Eventually I come to somewhere between one and eight images that I think I like.
If I am terribly indecisive I'll send it to the publisher or to the art editor or whatever who makes that kind of decision in a particular company.
He or she will choose the one that they like the most and make the decision for me.
Then once I am given the ball I run with it and do the final painting, the major painting.
That becomes the book cover.
Do you get any feedback from the authors about the cover?
Yes lots of times.
In fact with Friday I got a phone call from Robert A. Highline.
A couple months after I turned in the painting to Valentine Del Rey they sent him a cover proof which is a first run color tryout of what the cover is going to look like.
He called me up to tell me it was a little flattery.
He told me it was the best cover he ever had on a book of his which is really quite a statement for someone who has been in the field as long as he has.
To have an author tell me that I have captured a particular character or scene exactly the way they had it in mind is probably for me the highest praise that an illustrator can get.
That really had me floating up by the ceiling for a couple of weeks to think that he would bother to call me to tell me that.
Sometimes before I do a painting I will correspond with an author or talk to him or her on the phone to establish certain details.
With the White Dragon for example I talked to Anne McCaffrey at length about the actual details of the dragons.
As she saw the dragons in her book whether they had forks or tails that ended in a point or whatever or a barb or whatever and what their skin was like and what the texture was so that I could try to capture her image of what they look like.
It's kind of silly for someone who is an illustrator to try to make all that up when you can contact the author and get the details if they are not in the book straight from the person who thought them up.
When you did Friday, weren't you working in a new medium here? Airbrush?
Oh no, well no, I've been using the airbrush since 1975. The difference lately is that I'm using it a bit more than I was in the past.
Now in Friday there is no airbrush work in the foreground in the figure. That's all done with washes to create that smooth skin tone.
I deliberately went about doing that painting with the idea of giving a real photographic quality to what you're seeing so that you can reach out and touch her so to speak.
Which is also a very important part of that character.
The background though is composed of a lot of airbrush work and I usually keep my airbrush work to the background because I don't want it to dominate a painting.
I hate to work in airbrush frankly because it's so tedious and I'm so clumsy that I often spill things on me and mix it up color in the little bottles and all that.
The only airbrush I have is the crudest model made by the Pasha Airbrush Company and that forces me to keep it to the background pretty much.
I like to use it sometimes as a sketching tool when the airbrush develops soft masses of color in certain areas that have no hard edges so you can paint in and out of those areas without creating a distracting, I don't know what the word would be, background noise.
But distracting hard edges underneath what you're painting on top.
I think it will be some time before I actually bring my airbrush work right up to the foreground and make a painting that's completely airbrush.
My cover for Arthur C. Clark's book 2010 approaches that.
There is a lot of airbrush work in the foreground there.
But that was such a simple composition that it pretty much required that I think.
What about using oils and acrylics?
I know you prefer acrylics.
Well I prefer acrylics for illustration because they dry so quickly.
That's the only reason really.
Well there's two reasons actually why I like to use acrylics.
They dry so quickly and it's the main reason and that's the reason why I first started using them.
My training had all been in oils and watercolors and a lot of my early illustrations were in those two media.
But I found myself often working at 3 o'clock in the morning before the day or the morning of the day that I had to turn a painting in.
I couldn't bring a painting in wet so I'd have to make so much drier in with the painting.
There's a substance called cobalt drier that if you put too much in the paint it seriously affects the longevity of the painting.
In fact I have a painting I did in late 74 that has now cracked up a lot in oil painting because I had to rush it dry that way.
So my feeling is if I can't paint an oil painting right so that it will last and be a good investment to someone who may buy it
then I'd rather not use that medium at all unless I have the time to be able to develop it in the correct process
so that it'll last for posterity.
So I use acrylics and it certainly is easier for me.
I can paint right up to two minutes before the messenger comes to pick up my painting and take it to the publisher
and put in that last little highlight or whatever and not have to worry about it being wet or being damaged en route.
Some people say acrylics don't have the depth that oils have but I had to notice that.
It all depends on how you use them.
I see a lot of flat acrylic paintings frankly.
I had to teach myself how to use them and I think my background in oils dictated that I try to duplicate some of the feeling that you get in oil paintings with acrylics
and maybe because I approach it from that aspect I attempted to do that to get that feeling in depth with my acrylics
and other people who have just had a training in acrylics only don't try to do that because they feel limited by that.
The fast drying time is also a lot of ability with acrylics.
It's very hard to blend large areas of color and that's why I often resort to the airbrush.
I can do it with washes if I have to but it takes a lot longer.
I did a painting for a book by Clifford Simac called City.
There's a big blue sky in the background and it took me 32 washes of color
to get just the right gradations of blues in the background.
That took me about a day and a half or two days to do.
With an airbrush I probably could have gotten exactly the same effect in a half an hour.
When you're working a hundred hour week or an 80 hour week like I do,
a half an hour can make a big difference in the painting.
I don't work 80 or 100 hour weeks all the time but I often do.
It seems like most of the last year I did.
That half an hour or two days per the time makes a big difference.
I resort to the airbrush just because it is a good time saving tool and I can duplicate the same effects.
I like oil paints a lot and I want to get back into using them
just because it has a whole historical romantic feeling to it.
It's hard to describe to someone who is a non-artist but the smell of turpentine in a studio
has a certain sense of nostalgia and romance to it.
It is an entirely enjoyable experience to paint in oils.
It's a whole different thing from working in acrylics.
I would like to go back into painting with oils.
I just have to give myself the time to do so.
There is a problem I have with oils though which is the second reason why I use acrylics.
I develop skin problems when I get turpentine in contact with my skin.
I seem to be allergic to it.
I sometimes have to use gloves or whatever when I am painting with oils.
That makes it a less enjoyable experience.
I like to have the feeling of holding the brush without the barrier of this rubber in between my hand and the brush.
That may be a reason why I haven't gotten back into painting with oils.
Let's see. What about the first time you were here?
What was that about?
I felt really good about it but a little ambivalent.
I felt like it came a year too late because a year before I had done the White Dragon.
I had done the entire John Carter of Mars series.
I felt there was a pinnacle of my work at that time.
That's when I felt I really deserved to get it.
A year after that I still hadn't felt that I had bettered the work I had done the year before.
I didn't feel...
This often happens with Academy Awards for example.
There will be three excellent movies that deserve to get the best picture.
The award can only go to one.
They will give it to one and give an award to the same director or something three years down the pike for a lesser effort.
It's partially in acknowledgement of what the person did before that they didn't get the Oscar for.
I felt that that was the situation the first time.
I have gotten two or three more since then.
It's easy for me to be blasé about it and say it's just an award.
It's great but it doesn't pay the rent and it doesn't do a thing for my income or whatever.
I'm not sure I would enjoy not getting one either.
Other artists will ask me how does it feel when another hugo or whatever.
I'll go, it's alright.
It's nice.
Again, it's easy for me to say that because I'm winning it.
If I didn't win it, it would probably really bug me.
I'm a competitive person, I have to admit.
There are times when I'm sitting down and I think,
wow, there's X number of thousand people that voted for me as the best artist.
That's really something that there's that many people that enjoy my work that much.
I actually put my name down as the best artist that they can think of.
That's really something that gives me a boost sometimes.
Here's a real hard question.
I'm sure you're running to this.
I have several friends who are fantasy and space art.
They went on to get formal training in the arts.
When they draw what was required in class,
but when they went through what they wanted to draw,
the instructor's gotten a little strange.
Did you run into that?
You run into it all the time.
It's getting worse if not better.
I mean, it's getting worse if it's not the same.
There's only one school, an art school, I can think of that has opened up their attitudes towards that since 1972.
There could very well be others, but I know the Paris School of Art in Connecticut
has changed their attitudes a little bit as a result of Don Mates,
who is one of their major graduates and who is a Hugo nominee now.
They have a little bit more of a taller attitude towards science fiction or fantasy art.
Unfortunately, you'll find a snobby attitude down towards fantasy and science fiction art.
Among the public in general, it's just nearly impossible for anyone who does the type of work I do
to get into galleries, to get any kind of critical recognition at all.
It's only in the last few years that it's starting to show any hope.
Unfortunately, the art schools, as usual, are years behind the real world.
Even if they started showing fantasy and science fiction work in major museums and galleries,
on a regular basis, it's going to be a long time until the art schools
catch up and start showing a better attitude towards it.
This is something I ran into.
It's one of the reasons why I dropped out so quickly from Art Center.
There's an instance where, there was a class I had, a figure drawing class,
and the teacher was late and hadn't come in yet, and the model was just standing there.
I had my drawing pad in front of me, and the model was dressed up in an 1890s type of getup,
and he had a bicycle pump that was his prop.
He was just standing there in this ridiculous pose that I had no interest in.
I couldn't see any reason why I should have to draw that.
I knew that I could draw it if I wanted to.
I'd graduated already with a BA degree in painting at San Jose State University.
I'm capable.
I could draw that figure without having the figure in front of me.
It was no problem.
I just ignored him standing there and drew a picture of a giant, a big bald giant,
standing on a mountain top, a very heroic type of pose.
The teacher came in, looked over my shoulder and said,
What is that?
Then proceeded to scold me and give me all kinds of verbal abuse
about refusing to draw what was in front of me.
I just packed up my things and said, That's it.
What am I here for?
This is ridiculous.
I'm not being taught anything by being forced to draw something
that I have no interest in that I could learn nothing from.
This you find in art schools all the time.
There's also the situation where you have instructors who don't know
how to teach, how to draw realistic art.
One thing that I see all the time,
I have art students corresponding with me.
Art students who come to conventions to see me and talk to me.
Where can I go to find out how to draw a person?
Where can I go to find out how to render something the way it looks in real life?
Because all they're getting are classes as an abstract painting,
how to express your feelings.
You can't express your feelings unless you have a vocabulary.
If you've got to learn the vocabulary, the fundamentals first,
if you decide to cast those aside, then fine.
But first you've got to have a grounding in the academic training.
After all, even Picasso did that.
He was an incredible academy painter.
He could render human figures with remarkable verity.
First, but then he decided to go into more abstract expression.
Fine, but you've got to have that grounding first.
I don't think...
Well, anyway, this is a pet peeve of mine.
I see this happening time and time again where a school will graduate
a number of students who are unable to make a living commercially as an artist,
either doing portraits or commissions or in the commercial field
because they're simply not skilled and don't have the mental makeup to be able to do it.
So they end up being teachers.
And what do they teach? The same thing that they paint.
And so it's just a self-promoting system and it gets worse and worse and worse as the years go on.
You get more and more incompetent people.
And they graduate people who can't make a living out in the real world, quote, unquote,
and they go back and teach as a way of living and they teach more incompetent people.
And the poor students are the ones who are suffering because they go to a school,
trust in a school to teach them what they need to know to be able to paint properly
or express what they want to express.
And they're not getting the education.
I had a strong feeling that you were going to be able to do this.
Yes, I had been.
I waited two and a half years at San Jose State University
until I finally started getting classes from what I considered to be decent instructors.
I don't know why schools don't require their art teachers to have portfolios
available for viewing by students before they sign up for their class.
You can tell by looking at a teacher's portfolio what the teacher's attitude is.
In fact, even if there's a little resume, that would help too.
What the teacher's attitude is towards art, what the teacher's viewpoints are, et cetera.
Then you could pick an instructor who has a possibility of teaching you what you want to learn.
But it's ridiculous if you want to be a nature painter, for example,
and paint natural animals in whatever, in a realistic manner,
take a class from someone who teaches abstract expressionism.
It's useless. It's a waste of money. It's a waste of time.
Absolutely pointless.
Good art is... Well, I can get into my whole spiel about abstract art anyway.
There's no such thing as abstract... I mean, good art that is not good abstract art to begin with.
That's the whole point by Whistler's mother. It's an abstract painting.
The actual name or title of that painting is an arrangement in blacks and grays, I believe,
is the actual title of the painting.
Every good painting is a good abstract painting.
It's just that someone who works realistically or works in a way that gives you a feeling that he's painting reality
is taking it one step beyond the abstract,
whereas an abstract painter will leave it at that point and not carry it any further.
Sure. I'm sorry. I'm getting...
I'm going to climb off my soapbox here for a second.
What... Aside from fantasy, in general, what are your favorite subjects?
Favorite type of subject? If you're not painting a cover, why paint?
I think one thing that you can say about my work is that I try to cover all the fields.
And that's because it's all... I don't have any particular favorite.
I think I could say I have a favorite assignment each year.
There's one assignment I get every year that is the one I look forward to.
It's a regular thing now with doll books, and that's your best horror stories cover.
It's a collection of horror stories, supposedly the year's best.
And I have completely free reign. I often do with book covers, but especially with this one.
And that's enjoyable to me. I like doing a good horror painting once in a while.
I'm not a person who's interested in all the blood and guts.
That's not necessarily what I... I equate that more with revulsion than I do with horror.
There's a difference, but that is a lot of fun, and I've enjoyed doing that cover every year.
That painting, I should say.
I've come up with a few pretty scary ideas that never let me paint, too.
Some day that I'll do just for myself, but that's only one aspect.
I like, of course, the other aspects of science fiction and fantasy also.
I like to paint... I like the exploration of space, what they call hardware paintings with spaceships and all that.
That's a lot of fun. I like to just kind of keep my fingers in all of it.
So I can't really say I have a... especially having a favorite field.
Horror is one of them, and that particular job is probably my favorite assignment out of the year.
But I can't say it's doing horror. It's something I like to do over doing other things, per se.
Question from one of the other guys.
How much does a cover affect the salability or popularity of a book? Do you get any feedback on that?
Well, it...
A cover of a solo book?
I honestly don't know. I really don't know.
Sometimes I think it makes a big difference, other times I don't.
The fact that my career has gone where it has, and that...
Sometimes I think it makes a big difference.
The fact that I'm getting paid what I do and everything to do these covers,
and that the publishers seem to think that my work sells books over just the title and the name of the author
makes me think sometimes that our work has a lot to do with it.
There are other times when you'll see a bestseller that has an absolutely wretched cover
or has no... nothing but type on it that's selling quite well,
then you think the cover art has absolutely nothing to do with it.
So it's really hard to say.
It's a balance, I think, between how famous the author is, how much publicity the book has gotten,
and the expectations that people have had before the book has been published.
A book like Foundations Edge.
The Foundation series by Isaac Gasmav has a large readership.
They've been waiting for this book and it's come out.
They could have put a black cover with just the title Foundations Edge on it,
and that thing would have sold off the shelf.
But just to be sure, they've hired me to do the paperback cover for that book.
But books that have large, very large, that are published in large publications have large budgets,
and so they can afford to have a good cover for that.
And I think that's why it's true as... see what's his name?
The founder of Dell. His last name was Dellacourt.
Don't remember his first name.
Anyway, he said, what you do is when you have a good painter, good cover artist,
use them for your best books or your worst books.
That way you cover both of your bases.
But he has especially accented the idea of using your best cover artists for your worst books,
because then at least you minimize your losses.
Everything on top of that is gravy.
And so, I don't know.
I asked one publisher if that was true, and she said yes.
We'll put you on our worst books and on our best books.
And if you can't tell a difference, that's fine with us, but if you can...
That's her attitude.
And I guess that's good, because that way I get to read some good ones.
Lately, they've all been really great books.
I haven't had any clinkers, so...
I'll put it before the interview.
Whether...let's say an editor is in there and they're reading this one.
Oh boy, you've got to buy this from this guy.
He said he would.
Now we're going to stop with it.
Get Waylon in here and have him do a discover.
Yeah, that's happened many times.
And in fact, I don't want to name names, so I can't.
I won't, on this particular instance, because the writer is someone that I really like.
And most of the work that this writer has done is excellent.
But this particular piece was a real loser.
I shouldn't have said what I said just a minute ago, that I haven't had many clinkers lately.
This was a real clinker, and I did the cover within the last three months.
And the painting was not one of my best.
I'm proud of it, but I wouldn't put it up there with the white dragon.
I'll put it that way.
And I think my attitude towards doing the cover was directly derived from the lack of quality in the book
and my disappointment with the book.
And that does happen sometimes, unfortunately, in spite of myself.
In your opinion, is science fiction and fantasy art getting better?
Staying the same?
Oh, it's definitely getting better.
Getting better all the time.
And despite my gloomy feelings about art schools and all that,
the recognition for science fiction and fantasy art is starting to swing upwards.
I've had one man shows in a few museums,
and I've been part of group shows in some museums up north and in the east.
And there is talk now among people in the Smithsonian, among other institutions,
of having major science fiction-oriented art shows.
If this starts happening, and we get this much needed critical appraisal,
which is the main problem with science fiction art,
is that there is no critiquing being done of it.
Then I think we'll start to get some recognition.
We'll get more critiques.
Then we'll get investors interested in it, and the prices will come up,
and it will reach a level of respectability comparable with, say, western art.
Right now, old fantasy art, the work of Maxwell Parrish, Arthur Rackham, people like that,
is fairly highly respected and commands decent prices, I would imagine.
But new work is done at the bottom of the scale, and it's going to take some time.
The same thing was true of science fiction literature.
It was always in the ghetto, so to speak, as the writers often would say.
What's out of the ghetto now?
Literature is a commanding force on the bestseller list.
The New York Times bestseller list has over half the items,
are now so-called genre items, either for science fiction or fantasy books, commanding the bestseller list.
It's out of the ghetto now.
It's getting critical appraisal and some recognition as an art form in the literature field.
It's time now for the art to do the same thing, and I don't think it'll be much longer until it does.
It'll just require some extraordinary efforts on the part of the artist to get to go out
and publicize it, to show it to the public.
I have to say, whenever I've had a one-man show or been part of a group show of science fiction, fantasy, record,
we have not had a show yet in a museum or gallery that has not broken all attendance records for previous shows in that gallery.
It happened at the New Britain Museum of Art, it happened in the Canton Ohio Museum of Art,
it happened in the Butler Museum of Art.
They put in a science fiction or fantasy show and it'd break all attendance records for that particular museum.
So there's an incredible support for this type of art among the general public.
It's just going to take the snob sometimes to realize that and to realize that it's something,
that there is some good art in there worthy of notice and critical appraisal.
It's all tied together.
Until the critics deign to look and say, some of this is good art and start spelling out what is good and what isn't,
then it's not going to be considered seriously by the people who invest in art.
I've got to say that, that is something that I'm really disappointed in,
is that there doesn't seem to be a whole lot of...
We need people who are willing to put their reputations on the line and say,
this art is good and this person's art is not good.
Being a self-supported group of people in science fiction and the fantasy community,
everyone is mutually supportive and everyone tries to be democratic,
but that's not the way the real world works.
If you have an art show that has several excellent pieces of work in it and several bad things that
the majority of people are going to look at and say, that's terrible, what's that doing in this show?
People aren't going to take it very seriously because they're going to feel that
science fiction art is basically anything that's weird or grotesque and that there's no standards for quality in the field.
There are some people attempting to form an academy of science fiction and fantasy art,
and this may help a lot in establishing a basis for standards or, well not standards,
I'm not trying to get that across, let me say, basis for quality.
For example, good rendering and basic things that make a piece of art good.
Very little. Let's look at the western artists.
The western art has a heritage, a heritage going back to Remington and other artists from back then.
It's got a standard of quality, a benchmark with Remington and other artists for people to aspire to or to try to better,
even if their styles are more modern or whatever.
What does science fiction and fantasy art have?
Well, it's got the art of the Polps from the 30s, and that's about it.
Most of that art was a real dreck.
Let's face it, when people look at it, even among the general public, it's considered pretty terrible art.
Some of it was excellent, there's some excellent art from back then also, but there was a lot of terrible work.
There have even been books published of the art of the Polps and everything,
and this is what people see in the bookstores, they think science fiction art,
they think of the old women in the brass brassiere fighting the tentacled monster in the cliche situations
with a bubble helmet and everything, and hopefully Star Wars and some of the new movies
that have been out in the last 10 years.
Although it's tried to change that image, and if people become more aware of the art in the books also, that will change also.
We're still fighting to overcome the bad taste left over from the art of the 30s and 40s, the Polp art.
Have you had any inquiries into doing production design like in the rough McCory?
Rough McCory.
McCory?
Yes, yes, I've even got an agent now in Hollywood who's fielding those for me.
I've had a few real weirdos come up to me with these great movie proposals,
and I've wasted so much time dealing with these people that I've had to finally get an agent to handle some of those.
I am working on a movie project now that may develop into a full scale production, I don't know, we'll see.
But I can't talk about what I'm getting into.
I've signed a paper to the effect that I can't reveal any information about the movie until they choose to do so in a publicity release.
Can we talk about it?
What are you working on that you can't cover?
Oh, that I can talk about?
I just finished the cover for Foundations Edge for Isagasmop.
There's a new dragon book by Ann McCaffrey that I'll start reading soon.
I've got another year's best horror stories cover to do next month, or this month actually.
April anyway.
What month are we in here?
There are so many things going on, it's really hard for me to remember them all.
There's the final Fuzzing manuscript by HP, HP Lovecraft, HP and Piper.
I am wrapping up a children's book, my first children's book.
That's a collaboration with another artist named David Wenzel.
It should be a real nice book.
Let me think, we're doing...
I've got a stack of manuscripts in my studio that's probably five feet high.
They come in and I say, well, that looks like a fun one to do.
I can fit in my schedule and then I put it in the pile and forget about it
until I get done with the painting before that one is due and pick up the manuscript and say, oh yeah, this one.
I've forgotten what and all my projects are.
I've done books as much as a year in advance at any particular time.
That certainly is the situation now.
I remember, there's some of them that I remember.
Those are the ongoing projects in the Dragon one because I've got a special interest in it.
McCaffrey's work, but that's all I think of off the top of my head.
How many projects do you have going on at one time? Paintings?
I usually like to keep it to just one.
I hate to divide my interest between one painting and another project.
I go to Great Lanks to maintain a mood throughout a painting.
I did a painting that took place on a sandy planet, for example, it was all desert.
I recorded a six hour tape of all wind noises and like wind in the desert.
I just played that while I was painting the painting because I wanted to keep in the mood
and the feeling of that book and that painting.
I'd hate to be in the middle of that planet and that scene and trying to develop this environment
and then have to break it into a painting of something horrible or something, or whatever.
But it's sometimes a force too and it's happened a couple of times.
But I'm usually good enough at juggling my schedule around so I don't have to.
It is very beneficial sometimes to have a break after doing all the sketches.
I've sent the sketches into the publisher and they're looking those over for me to do another project
because when the sketches come back to me I see them with a fresh eye.
Even though the publisher may have picked one particular one, I may find a different one
that I think it really is better for the book after all and I'll throw the other ones aside.
I'll talk it over with the publisher and we'll figure out a way to compromise on them or something.
Or they'll let me go ahead and do the one I want to do.
But that is good to have a break between going through all the analyzing, the collating,
and doing the sketches before doing the final painting is good to have a break in there.
While I'm actually doing the big rendering, I hate to have to break that into another one.
That's one of the reasons why I have a strong dislike for advertising work.
Advertising work always involves having to do extra work on a painting.
You do a piece, it's the only time that ever happens to me, never happens to me with paperback covers.
I get something sent back to me for changes.
But I'll do an advertising job.
Well, advertising jobs are almost always judged by committee.
Men in the advertising company and someone always has to come up with an idea
that makes it sound like he's worth being hired to work in this company.
So if a piece of artwork gets passed around for a particular client, they'll look at it and they'll say,
well, I think this and everyone's got to have an idea.
And some of the ideas are the most stupid things I've ever heard in my life.
I'll tell you, working for advertising companies are really something.
And don't think of anything to put in, to have some input in this particular committee meeting about my piece of work
or any artist's piece of work.
I don't know any artist that doesn't have things sent back from advertising agencies and stuff on a regular basis.
And so I'll be working out, I will finish the painting, send it into an ad company or whatever.
I'll be on the next one and then the thing will come back to me because I want changes here
or brighten up this or take this out or whatever.
Then I'll have to stop and work on that other one to make the changes and send that back in.
Then I can go back to the painting I was working on.
And I hate that so much.
That's why I avoid doing a lot of advertising job.
I mean, I charge them for the extra work and all that.
And that kind of discourages them from sending it back to me.
But a lot of times it doesn't.
Let's get into glass, onion graphics a little bit.
Why did you decide to open that up?
It was a gradual process.
I'd always wanted to make prints of my work available.
Most of my work sells for pretty high prices and fans simply can't afford it.
And when I go to a convention, I like to have something that they can afford to buy.
And the way around that is by doing prints and posters of my work.
Glass, onion graphics was created to fill that need.
Now my wife has helped me out a lot by doing my bookkeeping, for example, and other things.
She stopped doing what she was doing in order to help me out in my business to a certain extent.
And glass, onion graphics was kind of an extension of that.
I said, if you want to go ahead and make a print of my work, I'd be really happy.
You can take all the profit and everything, as long as we have print available for fans to buy or whatever.
And she's turned it into a full-scale business.
Now she's so busy, she doesn't have time to do my bookkeeping and all this other stuff that we originally were going to do.
We've had to hire extra people, we have a secretary and whatever.
But now it's grown into a full-scale business.